Definition of [primitive objects (S,F,=)]: An implementation-defined
pair (S,F,=), where S is a set, F is the [??? failure fixed-point],
and = is an equivalence relation on S.

Definition of [=]: The equivalence relation = in the [primitive
objects (S,F,=)].

Definition of [set of primitive objects]: The set S in the [primitive
objects (S,F,=)].

Definition of [primitive term]: An object T that is a member of the
[set of primitive objects].

Definition of [non-primitive term]: A directed graph T where all of
the following conditions hold:

  a. For every leaf L of T there exists a [primitive term] P such that
     L is labeled P.

  b. For every vertex V of T there exists a non-negative integer U
     such that for all integers I less than or equal to U, there
     exists an edge E emanating from T such that E is labeled I.

Definition of [term]: An object T where exactly one of the following
conditions hold:

  1. T is a [primitive term].

  2. T is a [non-primitive term].

Definition of [identical non-leaf vertices V1 and V2]: Two non-leaf
vertices V1 and V2 are identical if and only if V1 is the same vertex
as V2.

Definition of [identical non-leaf vertices]: [identical non-leaf
vertices V1 and V2] for some V1 and V2.

Definition of [identical leaf vertices L1 and L2]: A leaf L1 is
identical to a leaf L2 if and only if L1 [=] L2.

Definition of [identical leaf vertices]: [identical leaf vertices L1
and L2] for some L1 and L2.

Definition of [identical edges E1 and E2]: An edge E1=(E1V1,E1V2) of
is identical to the edge E2=(E2V1,E2V2) if and only if all of the
following conditions hold:

  1. E1V1 and E1V2 are [identical non-leaf vertices].

  2. Either E1V2 and E2V2 are [identical non-leaf vertices], or E1V2
     and E2V2 are [identical leaf vertices].

  2. The vertex label on E1 is the same as the vertex label on E2.

Definition of [identical edges]: [identical edges E1 and E2] for some
E1 and E2.

Definition of [identical edge sets]: A set of edges E1 is identical to
a set of edges E2 if and only if all of the following conditions hold:

  1. For every edge E1e of E1 there exists an edge E2e of E2 such that
     E1e and E2e are [identical edges].

  2. For every edge E2e of E2 there exists an edge E1e of E1 such that
     E2e and E1e are [identical edges].

Definition of [identical terms]: A [term] T1 is identical to a [term] T2 if
and only if exactly one of the following conditions hold:

  1. T1 and T2 are [primitive term]s and T1 [=] T2.

  2. Otherwise, T1 and T2 are [non-primitive term]s. T1 and T2 are
     identical if and only if the set of edges of T1 and the set of
     edges of T2 are [identical edge sets].

Definition of [rule from T1 to T2]: a pair (T1,T2), where both T1 and
T2 are [term]s.

Definition of [rule]: A [rule from T1 to T2] for some T1 and T2.

Definition of [non-deterministic]: A [rule from T1a to T2a] is said to
be non-deterministic with respect to a [rule from T1b to T2b] if and
only if both of the following conditions hold:

  1. T1a and T1b are [identical terms].

  2. It is not the case that T2a and T2b are [identical terms].

Definition of [deterministic]: A rule R1 is deterministic with respect
to a rule R2 if and only if R1 is not [non-deterministic] with respect
to R2.

Definition of [fixed point F in Q]: A [term] F is a fixed point in a
set of [rule]s Q if and only if there exists a [rule from F to F] in
Q.

Definition of [environment]: A set of [rule]s E where all of the
following conditions hold:

  1. For all R1 in E, and for all R2 in E, R1 is [deterministic] with
     respect to R2.

  2. There does not exist a [rule from _1 to N] in E such that N is
     not a [fixed point] in E and there does not exist a [rule from N
     to _2] in E.
